# Turning

# 20151220

### Aim

To learn how to conduct various types of turn, and to turn accurately towards a
features and on to specific headings

### Objectives

From memory correctly state:

* Using the model, correctly state the force that turns the aircraft.

* From memory, correctly state the effect on turning performance when IAS is
  increased.

* From memory, correctly state the technique to enter, maintain, and exit a
  medium level turn.

----

* VCL ~ Vertical Component of Lift

* HCL ~ Horizontal Component of Lift

* Turn is caused by HCL

* Load Factor (LF) = Lift:Weight

  * Straight & Level, 1:1

  * 30deg, 1.15:1

  * 60deg, 2:1

### Turn Performance

* AoB ~ Angle of Bank

* With constant IAS and increasing AoB

  * Turn Radius decreases

  * Rate of Turn increases

* With increasing IAS and constant AoB

  * Turn Radius increases

  * Rate of Turn decreases

### Adverse Aileron Yaw

* Adverse Aileron Yaw is tendency to yaw out of turn

* Frise Aileron to counteract

* Differential Aileron to counteract

### Slip and Skid

* For example, under a left turn

  * Turn coordinator to the left

    |   |   |   |
    |:-:|:-:|:-:|
    | * |   |   |

    **Slip: needs left rudder input**

  * Turn coordinator to the right

    |   |   |   |
    |:-:|:-:|:-:|
    |   |   | * |

    **Skid: needs right rudder input**

  * Turn coordinator centre

    |   |   |   |
    |:-:|:-:|:-:|
    |   | * |   |

    **Balanced**

### Over/Under banking

* Climbing Turn

  * Outer wing

    * Greater AoA on outer wing

    * Overbank tendency

    * Aileron to correct

* Descending Turn

  * Inner wing

    * Greater AoA on inner wing

    * Underbank tendency

    * Aileron to correct

### Types of Turn

* **Gentle**: Up to 15 degrees AoB

* **Rate 1**: `(True Air Speed + 7) / 10`, usually ~15 degrees AoB, also known
  as 2 minute turn

* **Medium**: 30 degrees AoB

* **Climbing**: 15 degrees (Rate 1) limit

* **Descending**: 30 degrees (Medium) limit

### Application

1. Lookout

2. Select reference

3. Select Altitude

4. Begin turn: ALAP

5. * Bank with aileron

   * Balance with rudder for slip & skid (slight)

   * Backpressure on elevator (slight)

6. End turn: ALAP

### Airmanship

Handing over and taking over clarity.

### Threat & Error Management

* Aeroplane

  * Threat: high wing in C162 obscures vision, manage with lookout

* Pilot

  * Threat: disorientation, manage with handover

* Environment

  * Threat: terrain, manage with lookout

----

### Questions

* **Which force turns an aircraft?**

  The horizontal component of lift (HCL).

* **What makes up a Load Factor?**

  The ratio of lift to weight.

* **Given a constant IAS and increasing AoB, what happens to Turn Radius and Rate
  of Turn?**

  Turn Radius decreases, Rate of Turn increases
  
* **Given an increasing IAS and constant AoB, what happens to Turn Radius and Rate
  of Turn?**

  Turn Radius increases, Rate of Turn decreases

* **What is adverse aileron yaw and how is it counteracted [on the C162]?**

  The tendency to yaw out of a turn. Counteracted with a Frise Aileron and
  Differential Aileron.

* **Under a left turn, the turn coordinator is left of centre. Respond.**
 
  The aircraft is slipping and requires left rudder input to balance.

* **Under a left turn, the turn coordinator is right of centre. Respond.**
 
  The aircraft is skidding and requires right rudder input to balance.

* **Under a right turn, the turn coordinator is right of centre. Respond.**
 
  The aircraft is slipping and requires right rudder input to balance.

* **Under a right turn, the turn coordinator is left of centre. Respond.**
 
  The aircraft is skidding and requires left rudder input to balance.

* **What is overbanking?**

  A tendency to roll on a climbing turn, due to a greater AoA on the outer wing.
  Corrected with aileron.

* **What is underbanking?**

  A tendency to roll on a descending turn due to a greater AoA on the inner
  wing. Corrected with aileron.

* **What is a gentle turn?**

  Up to 15 degrees AoB.

* **What is a rate 1 turn?**

  A turn that takes two minutes, calculated by `(TAS + 7)/10`, approximately 15
  degrees AoB for C162.

* **What is a medium turn?**

  Up to 30 degrees AoB.

* **What is the limit for a climbing turn?**

  15 degrees AoB.

* **What is the limit for a descending turn?**

  30 degrees AoB.

* **Apply a turn.**

  1. Lookout

  2. Select reference

  3. Select altitude

  4. Begin turn: ALAP

  5. Bank with aileron

  6. Balance for slip & skid with rudder

  7. Backpressure on elevator

  8. End turn: ALAP

* **What airmanship principles apply to turning?**

  Clarity on who is in control. Handing over & taking over.

* **What threats apply to the aeroplane during a turn?**

  The high-wing of the C162 obscures vision, managed with lookout.

* **What threats apply to the pilot during a turn?**
 
  Disorientation, managed with handing over.
  
* **What threats exist from the environment during a turn?**
 
  Terrain, managed with lookout.
