# Stalling

# 20160104

### Learning Outcomes

1. Explain the relevance of the Critical Angle of Attack.

2. Explain the effects of the following factors:

    a. Weight variations

    b. Power variations

    c. Flap extension

3. Recall from memory the airborne HASELL checks.

4. Recall indications of slow speed flight.

5. From memory, list the actions that must be taken by the pilot in the event of
   a stall.

6. Demonstrate an awareness and eagerness to identify possible threats to the 
   safe outcome of the flight.

### Stalling

* In the lift formula, `L = Cl * 0.5 * rho * V^2 * S`, the stalling component
  is `0.5 * rho * V^2`.

* A stall is induced by exceeding the Critical Angle of Attack.

* Since there is no instrument to measure AoA, manufacturers provide a stall
  speed (Vs).

* Vs assumes the aircraft is configured:

    * Maximum Take Off Weight (MTOW)

    * Idle Power

    * Load Factor = 1

    * Zero Flap

    * Most Forward CoG

* Sometimes Vs1 is given. Stall speed in landing configuration:

    * Full flap

    * Gear down

### Airspeed Indicator

* Bottom of green arc ~ stall speed with no flap.

* Bottom of white arc ~ stall speed with flap.

### Factors affecting stall speed

* Reduction in weight.

* Load Factor change.

* Effect of Power.

* Effect of Flap.

* Use of aileron.

### Calculating new stall speed

* `New Stall Speed = Old Stall Speed * (Load Factor ^ 0.5)`

* 60 degree AoB ~ 2g

* Therefore, 45 degree AoB ~ 1.41g

* Example question

      An aircraft with flying stall speed of 62KIAS performs a 60 degree turn.
      What is the new stall speed?

### Wingdrop

* Do not use aileron in a stall, approximately < 60KIAS until airspeed recovers.

* Causes wingdrop and possible spin.

### Summary of Factors

| Factor           | Variation         | Result on Stall Speed |
|:-----------------|:-----------------:|:---------------------:|
| Weight           | increase          | increase              |
| Weight           | decrease          | decrease              |
| Load Factor      | increase          | increase              |
| Power            | increase          | decrease              |
| Flap             | extension         | decrease              |
| Leading Edge Ice | wing shape change | increase              |
| Bird Strike      | wing damage       | increase              |
| Hoar Frost       | boundary layer    | increase              |

### HASELL Checks

* **H**eight: Must recover by 3000AGL

* **A**irframe: Configured (flap up)

* **S**ecurity: No loose objects, hatches and harness secure

* **E**ngine: Pressures and temps checked

* **L**ocation: Not over built-up areas

* **L**ookout: 360 degree clearing turn before commencing and 90 degree between
  each stall

### Impending stall

##### Indicators

* Slow and decaying airspeed

* Nose-high attitude

* Less wind noise

* Controls less responsive

* Stall warning (5-8KIAS above Critical AoA)

* Control buffet

##### Recover 

Lower nose if warnings of impending stall

### Developed stall

##### Indicators

* loss of height *(guaranteed)*

* nose drop *(maybe)*

* wing drop *(maybe)*

##### Recover

* Lower nose to level

* Add full power

* Right rudder

* After sufficient airspeed, raise nose slightly

### Common Faults

* Lowering nose too far (do not exceed loss of > 100ft altitude)

* Delayed application of full power

* Pull up too quickly after recovery -> secondary stall

### Inducing stall

* at lower power setting, carb heat

* at stall warning, carb heat off

### Remember

* HASELL check

* Symptoms of impending stall

* Symptoms of developed stall

* Recovery of impending stall

* Recovery of developed stall

### Questions

1. **What is the relevance of the Critical Angle of Attack?**

   The Angle of Attack (chord line to RAF) at which the lift coefficient is at
   its maximum and the aircraft stalls. Increasing AoA after Critical rapidly
   reduces the lift coefficient.

2. **What is the effect of weight on an aircraft stall speed?**

   As weight increases, stall speed increases.

3. **What is the effect of power on an aircraft stall speed?**

   As power increases, stall speed decreases.

4. **What is the effect of flap on an aircraft stall speed?**

   Flap extension, stall speed decreases. Flap retraction, stall speed
   increases.

5. **What is the effect of load factor on an aircraft stall speed?**

   As load factor increases, stall speed increases.

6. **What is the HASELL process?**

   * **H**eight: Must recover by 3000AGL

   * **A**irframe: Configured (flap up)

   * **S**ecurity: No loose objects, hatches and harness secure

   * **E**ngine: Pressures and temps checked

   * **L**ocation: Not over built-up areas

   * **L**ookout: 360 degree clearing turn before commencing and 90 degree
     between each stall

7. **An aircraft with Vs = [35-65]KIAS performs a [10,20,30,45,60] degree turn.
   What is the new stall speed?**

   `LF = 1 / cos AoB`
   
   `New stall speed = Vs * (LF ^ 0.5)`

8. **What is a consequence of aileron in a stall?**

   Aileron on the stalled down wing will increase the AoA of the outer wing,
   resulting in wingdrop and possible spin.

9. **What are the indicators and recovery of an impending stall?**

   * Slow and decaying airspeed

   * Nose-high attitude

   * Less wind noise

   * Controls less responsive

   * Stall warning (5-8KIAS above Critical AoA)

   * Control buffet

   * To recover, lower nose

10. **What are the indicators and recovery of a developed stall?**

    * loss of height *(guaranteed)*

    * nose drop *(maybe)*

    * wing drop *(maybe)*

    * To recover, lower nose to level, add full power, right rudder. After
      sufficient airspeed, raise nose slightly

11. **What are common faults of stall recovery?**

    * lowering nose too far (do not exceed loss of > 100ft altitude)

    * delayed application of full power

    * pull up too quickly after recovery -> secondary stall

12. **What threats exist in inducing a stall?**

    Low power setting can cause carburetor icing. Apply carburetor heat until
    stall warning, then turn off.
